v23.2.0 initial release (#18012)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/v23.2/known-limitations.md

## New limitations

### PostgreSQL compatibility

>   - Updating subfields of composite types using dot syntax results in a syntax error. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/102984)

Reviewer: Moved to a later section.

### PL/pgSQL Limitations

> #### Support for PL/pgSQL features

Reviewer 2: Some other issues worth mentioning:
- [ ] EXIT and CONTINUE with label and condition #115271
- [ ] Variable shadowing #117508
- [ ] Cursor declaration with arguments #117746

> #### Support for PL/pgSQL features

Reviewer 3: Thanks, @DrewKimball, for the helpful review. As for this thread, just to be sure we're on the same page, I'm going to work on adding everything in the umbrella issue https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/117744 that's not already here, plus the additional three listed above.

> #### Support for PL/pgSQL features

Reviewer: Added all.

>   - Nested blocks within functions are not supported, and will lead to errors. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114775)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Nested blocks within PL/pgSQL blocks are not supported, and will lead to errors. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114775)
```

>   - Nested blocks within PL/pgSQL blocks are not supported, and will lead to errors. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114775)

Reviewer: Fixed.

  - Cursors opened in PL/pgSQL do not execute their queries lazily, affecting performance and resource usage. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/111479)

>   - PL/pgSQL exception blocks cannot catch transaction retry errors. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/111446)

Reviewer: Link to txn retry error reference doc, maybe?

```suggestion
  - PL/pgSQL exception blocks cannot catch transaction retry errors. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/111446)
```

>   - PL/pgSQL does not support referring to arguments by ordinals (e.g., `$1`, `$2`), limiting flexibility in function definitions. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114701)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - PL/pgSQL does not support referring to arguments by ordinals (e.g., `$1`, `$2`), limiting flexibility in function and procedure definitions. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114701)
```

>   - The language does not currently support `FOR` and `WHILE` loop statements, limiting control flow capabilities in routines. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/105246)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - PL/pgSQL does not support `FOR` loop statements, limiting control flow capabilities in routines. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/105246)
```

  - The `INTO` statement in PL/pgSQL does not support the `STRICT` option. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/107854)

#### Type Handling and Variable Declarations

- There are several known limitations regarding type handling and variable declarations in the current implementation of PL/pgSQL:

>   - The language does not support `RECORD` input arguments in UDFs. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/105713)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - PL/pgSQL does not support `RECORD` input arguments for UDFs and stored procedures. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/105713)
```

>   - Type coercion does not behave consistently with PostgreSQL, particularly when values are too wide for the target type. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/115385)

Reviewer: Given that context, I think we can remove this as a known limitation. Let me know if you disagree, @mikeCRL.

>   - PL/pgSQL lacks support for `RECORD`-type variables, which are dynamically typed in PostgreSQL. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114874)

Reviewer: I think this is a duplicate of the first bullet and can be removed.

  - Syntax for accessing members of composite types without parentheses is not supported. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114687)

>   - There is no support for adding context to errors with `RAISE` and for declaring variable collation. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/106237)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `RAISE` statements cannot be annotated with names of schema objects related to the error (i.e., using `COLUMN`, `CONSTRAINT`, `DATATYPE`, `TABLE`, or `SCHEMA`). [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/106237)
```

>   - `RAISE` statements cannot be annotated with names of schema objects related to the error (i.e., using `COLUMN`, `CONSTRAINT`, `DATATYPE`, `TABLE`, or `SCHEMA`). [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/106237)

Reviewer 2: I thought of an additional RAISE statement limitation ([issue here](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/117750)) - RAISE statements currently don't output to logs, only directly to the client.

>   - PL/pgSQL does not yet support `NOT NULL` variable declarations or set-returning functions. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/105243)

Reviewer: Not sure where the set-returning functions is mentioned, but I could have missed it

```suggestion
  - PL/pgSQL does not support `NOT NULL` variable declarations. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/105243)
```

> #### Limitations in User-Defined Functions (UDFs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Limitations in User-Defined Functions (UDFs) and Stored Procedures
```

>   - The `PERFORM` keyword is not supported in UDFs. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/108416)

Reviewer: I think this should be moved under the preceding heading.

```suggestion
  - PL/pgSQL does not support the `PERFORM` keyword. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/108416)
```

>   - UDFs cannot call other UDFs or stored procedures from within their bodies. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/88198)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - UDFs and stored procedures cannot call other UDFs or stored procedures from within their bodies. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/88198)
```

  - The `setval` function cannot be resolved when used inside UDF bodies. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/110860)
  - DDL statements (e.g., `CREATE TABLE`, `CREATE INDEX`) are not allowed within UDFs or procedures. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/110080)

>   - The language does not support `OUT` and `INOUT` argument modes in UDF definitions. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/100405)

Reviewer: This may be more of a PL/pgSQL than a function/procedure item; not sure

```suggestion
  - UDF and stored procedure definitions do not support `OUT` and `INOUT` argument modes. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/100405)
```

### SQL Optimizer and Read Committed Isolation

#### Optimizer and Locking Behavior

- The SQL optimizer has limitations under certain isolation levels:

>   - The new implementation of `SELECT FOR UPDATE` under serializable isolation is not yet the default setting. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114737)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The new implementation of `SELECT FOR UPDATE` is not yet the default setting under `SERIALIZABLE` isolation. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114737)
```

>   - `SELECT FOR UPDATE` does not lock completely-NULL column families in multi-column-family tables. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/116836)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `SELECT FOR UPDATE` does not lock completely-`NULL` column families in multi-column-family tables. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/116836)
```

>   - `SELECT ... FOR UPDATE` and `SELECT ... FOR SHARE` locks are dropped on lease transfers and range splits/merges. Unreplicated locks, used by default under SERIALIZABLE isolation, can be dropped during such events, affecting the desired ordering of concurrent accesses and potentially leading to transaction retry errors. [More information on SELECT FOR UPDATE](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/select-for-update)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `SELECT ... FOR UPDATE` and `SELECT ... FOR SHARE` locks are dropped on lease transfers and range splits/merges. Unreplicated locks, used by default under `SERIALIZABLE` isolation, can be dropped during such events, affecting the desired ordering of concurrent accesses and potentially leading to transaction retry errors. [More information on `SELECT ... FOR UPDATE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/select-for-update)
```

>   - `SELECT ... FOR UPDATE` and `SELECT ... FOR SHARE` locks are dropped on lease transfers and range splits/merges. Unreplicated locks, used by default under SERIALIZABLE isolation, can be dropped during such events, affecting the desired ordering of concurrent accesses and potentially leading to transaction retry errors. [More information on `SELECT ... FOR UPDATE`](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/select-for-update)

Reviewer 4: This isn't a new limitation, it has been true since at least 21.2, maybe earlier (whenever locking was initially added). What is new in 23.2 is that this is no longer a limitation either (a) when using read committed isolation or (b) with `enable_durable_locking_for_serializable` set to true when using serializable isolation.

Reviewer: I'm going to remove this item, because I had already updated the existing limitation in #18098 to reflect this info. cc @mikeCRL

#### Read Committed Isolation Limitations

- Several capabilities are not yet supported with [Read Committed isolation](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/read-committed):
  - DDL statements cannot be performed within explicit Read Committed transactions. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114778)

>   - Specific unique checks are not supported under Read Committed isolation. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/110873)

Reviewer: Done. @mikeCRL I'm taking the wording for all applicable items directly from the KLs in the published Read Committed doc.

  - `SKIP LOCKED` requests do not reliably skip over replicated locks. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/110743)
  - Promoting a lock from `shared` to `exclusive` is not supported. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/110435)

>   - Schema changes are not allowed within explicit transactions, and certain unique constraints are not supported. Shared locks cannot be promoted to exclusive locks, and `SKIP LOCKED` requests do not reliably skip over replicated locks. [More information on READ COMMITTED](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/read-committed)

Reviewer: This one duplicates all the above 4 and can probably be removed.

>   - Schema changes are not allowed within explicit transactions, and certain unique constraints are not supported. Shared locks cannot be promoted to exclusive locks, and `SKIP LOCKED` requests do not reliably skip over replicated locks. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/115057)

Reviewer 4: This item seems like a repeat of several items above, squashed together. I think it can be removed.

>   - Multi-column-family checks during updates may not function correctly. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/112488)

Reviewer: This wording is vague.

```suggestion
  - Multi-column-family checks during updates may not function correctly. [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/112488)
```

Reviewer 3: Thanks. Posted a question [here](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/112488#issuecomment-1889680069).

Reviewer 4: Instead of "may not function correctly" I suggest "are not supported under read committed isolation". I [answered your question](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114605#issuecomment-1890059871), hopefully that helps.

{% include {{page.version.version}}/known-limitations/sql-cursors.md %}

### Limitations for `SELECT FOR UPDATE`

> - [`SELECT FOR UPDATE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/select-for-update.md %}) places locks on each key scanned by the base index scan. This means that even if some of those keys are later filtered out by a predicate which could not be pushed into the scan, they will still be locked.

Reviewer 4: Like the limitation just below this one, I think it's worth mentioning that this limitation no longer exists either (a) when using read committed isolation or (b) with `optimizer_use_lock_op_for_serializable` set to true when using serializable isolation.

Maybe one way to do that would be to qualify it, like I tried below?

And I do think we should change the tracking link to cockroachdb/cockroach#114737

Reviewer: Done, and using the wording that was published [here](https://github.com/cockroachdb/docs/blob/main/src/current/v23.2/known-limitations.md#limitations-for-for-update-and-for-share-locks-under-serializable).

    [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/75457)

> - [`SELECT FOR UPDATE`]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/select-for-update.md %}) only places an unreplicated lock on the index being scanned by the query. This diverges from PostgreSQL, which aquires a lock on all indexes.

Reviewer: I think this is true but could use a quick fact-check

```suggestion
- By default under `SERIALIZABLE` isolation, [`SELECT FOR UPDATE`and `SELECT FOR SHARE` ]({% link {{ page.version.version }}/select-for-update.md %}) only place an unreplicated lock on the index being scanned by the query. This diverges from PostgreSQL, which acquires a lock on all indexes.
```

Reviewer 3: May need to update to instead reflect https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114737#issuecomment-1819750886 and link to that issue. @michae2 could you please review this and suggest relevant KL text?

Reviewer 4: @mikeCRL I propose we roughly keep this text, but qualify it. Something like:

> Under serializable isolation, `SELECT FOR UPDATE` only places an unreplicated lock on the index being scanned by the query. This diverges from PostgreSQL, which aquires a lock on all indexes. This limitation does not exist when using `SELECT FOR UPDATE` under read committed isolation or with `optimizer_use_lock_op_for_serializable` set to true when using `SELECT FOR UPDATE` under serializable isolation.

Also I do think we should change the tracking link to https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/114737

Reviewer: Fixed, and using the wording that is currently published [here](https://github.com/cockroachdb/docs/blob/main/src/current/v23.2/known-limitations.md#limitations-for-for-update-and-for-share-locks-under-serializable). 

@michae2, the currently published doc states that `enable_durable_locking_for_serializable` is the cluster setting to use here, and `optimizer_use_lock_op_for_serializable` is associated with the "unreplicated lock on the index being scanned by the query" limitation. Does the published version need to be corrected?

Reviewer 4: @taroface `enable_durable_locking_for_serializable` changes the unreplicated locks to replicated locks, and `optimizer_use_lock_op_for_serializable` changes the locking on the index being scanned to locking on the primary index.

    [Tracking GitHub issue](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/issues/57031)

> ### `SELECT FOR UPDATE` locks are dropped on lease transfers and range splits/merges

Reviewer 4: This is another one worth qualifying. Maybe we should say

> Under serializable isolation, SELECT FOR UPDATE locks are dropped on lease transfers and range splits/merges. This limitation does not exist when using SELECT FOR UPDATE under read committed isolation or with `enable_durable_locking_for_serializable` set to true under serializable isolation.

Reviewer: This is already fixed on the published version. @mikeCRL, however, I removed it from this list and kept it to the SELECT FOR UPDATE doc, because that somehow made sense at the time. Now I feel it's better off being on this doc as well, so if there is a merge conflict when rebasing this PR, I think we should simply keep this heading + include intact so that it's brought back. Sorry for the extra complication.

{% include {{page.version.version}}/known-limitations/stats-refresh-upgrade.md %}

### Statistics for deleted tables in `system.table_statistics` do not get removed

> When a table is dropped, the related rows in `system.table_statistics` are not deleted. CockroachDB does not delete historical statistics.

Reviewer 4: This one is fixed! 🙂

Reviewer: Removing!!
